   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-WDH337X

   Skip to content [ ]
     * Days Of The Year
     * Explore the Calendar
     * Log in
     * Join

   Fri Jul 8th, 2022

World Kebab Day

     * (BUTTON)

Quick facts

        When is it?

               o July 14th, 2017
               o July 13th, 2018
               o July 12th, 2019
               o July 10th, 2020
               o July 9th, 2021
               o July 8th, 2022
               o July 14th, 2023
               o July 12th, 2024
               o July 11th, 2025

                (BUTTON)

        What's the date pattern?
                Second Friday of July

        What are the hashtags?

               o #KebabDay
               o #WorldKebabDay

          + Today
          + Tomorrow

     There will not be peace until access to the kebab is universal
     Kofi Annan
       There is something special about a kebab, that combination of meat
       and vegetables skewered on a bamboo spear roasted over coals. The
       smoky flavor, the fantastic array of seasonings, or just the
       combination of the carnivore’s favorite treat and the herbivore’s
       secret vice makes it a place where we all can meet.
       World Kebab Day celebrates this delicious barbecue favorite and its
       origins, and of course, gives us an excuse to eat all the kebab we
       want!

Learn about World Kebab Day
       World Kebab Day has been created so that we can celebrate this
       incredible meal! No matter whether you like to have a doner kebab
       after you have been clubbing with your friends or you are a fan of
       the shish kebab and often make them yourself, this is a day to
       celebrate.
       There is only one thing that can be on the menu this evening! If
       you’re a vegetarian, fear not! You can easily make a vegetarian
       kebab. A lot of people have substituted the traditional meat with
       different ingredients, such as tofu, cheese, and vegetables over
       the years.

History of World Kebab Day
       Kebabs have a long and august history, starting in the Middle East
       where initially they were simply grilled meat heavily seasoned.
       There are two particular varieties which those of us in the West
       are particularly familiar, being shish kebab and doner kebab.
       Shish kebab is far and away the more commonly known term and refers
       to a variety that is popular in Asia. Most commonly made of lamb or
       beef, it has also been known to contain swordfish or chicken. While
       we usually see these dishes prepared with the vegetables and meat
       on the same skewer, they were initially done separately.
       The doner kebab, on the other hand, is most commonly known as the
       source of the meat for gyros. Essentially it’s layers of meat
       stacked into an inverted cone and slowly roasted by turning next to
       a vertical cooking element. The outer layer is slowly sliced as it
       cooks and served, most commonly in a pita as the famous gyro. This
       isn’t the only thing a doner kebab is used for, but if the others
       top the gyro… we’d like to try them.
       Other varieties you might find are Kebab Kenjeh, Kebab Halabi,
       Burrah, Kalmi, and Galouti, just to name a few!

How To Celebrate World Kebab Day
       The easiest (and tastiest!) way to celebrate World Kebab Day is to
       go out and sample the delicious flavors that can only be found in
       the best of kebabs. You can also organize a barbecue at your home
       and have your friends bring all their favorite kind of kebabs and
       serve them up fresh!
       These days people are putting everything on kebabs, from chicken
       and vegetables to pieces of pineapple. Anything you can imagine can
       be put on a kebab and prepared with rich flavorful seasonings over
       smoky coals. World Kebab Day encourages you to be creative and
       bring out the best in your kebabs, and let your skewers become
       vehicles for culinary deliciousness.
       If you are someone who often makes kebabs art home, why not look
       for ways to take your creation to the next level? One thing we
       would recommend is dry aging the beef. Dry aging your beef is an
       amazing way to enhance the taste and quality. This is because dry
       aging can help to get rid of the moisture from the muscle of the
       meat. Doing so gives the beef a stronger taste.
       In addition, the beef’s enzymes begin to weaken the connective
       tissue. Your beef will be very tender after the dry aging process.
       There are certain cuts of beef that you can dry age at your own
       home. However, you have to make sure that your refrigerator can
       maintain a temperature that is below 40 degrees Fahrenheit. It is a
       good idea to find boneless beef rib roast or prime lean roast.
       Before you can dry age the beef, you will need to wash it. After it
       is clean, use a clean towel to pat it dry. You will have to pat the
       meat dry repeatedly throughout this process in order to get rid of
       any extra moisture. After the cut is dry, you will need to wrap the
       beef in cheesecloth. Place a rack on a sheet pan. Place the beef on
       the rack before transferring everything to the refrigerator.
       On the next day, you will need to take the cheesecloth off the beef
       temporarily. Use a clean towel to remove any extra moisture. Once
       this has been done, wrap the beef in the same cheesecloth that you
       have been using and put it back in the refrigerator. Doing this
       each day gives you the chance to keep the cheesecloth from becoming
       attached to the beef cut.
       You should repeat this process every day until the beef is ready
       for consumption. You must cook or freeze the beef within seven days
       of starting the dry age process. Most people dry age their beef for
       as little as three days and as much as seven days. If you want a
       stronger flavour, you should leave the beef in the refrigerator for
       seven days.
       Remember that it is important for you to use the same cheesecloth.
       In addition, you might want to place a box of baking soda near the
       meat. This helps you ensure that your meat will not absorb any foul
       odours. After the dry age process, you will need to use a knife to
       cut off the edges of the beef that might be hard. Dry aging will
       often cause the outer edges of the beef cut to harden.

Also on Fri Jul 8th...
       View all holidays
       Fri Jul 8th, 2022

Math 2.0 Day
       (BUTTON)
       Fri Jul 8th, 2022

National Chocolate with Almonds Day
       (BUTTON)
       Fri Jul 8th, 2022

National SCUD Day
       (BUTTON)
       Mon Jul 4th, 2022 - Sun Jul 10th, 2022

Great British Pea Week
       (BUTTON) View all holidays

Our Highlights

Explore
          + What's today?
          + What's tomorrow?
          + What's coming up?
          + Our blog

Help & Support
          + About us
          + Submit An Event
          + API & Data Services
          + FAQ
          + Advertising
          + Contact

Legal
          + Cookie Policy
          + Privacy Statement
          + Disclaimer
          + Imprint
          + Terms

Find us on
          + Facebook
          + Instagram
          + Twitter
          + Pinterest
       © 2022 Days Of The Year. All rights reserved.
       The ultimate guide to the world’s weird, funny, wonderful, unknown
       and bizarre national holidays.
       Manage your privacy
       To provide the best experiences, we and our partners use
       technologies like cookies to store and/or access device
       information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us and our
       partners to process personal data such as browsing behavior or
       unique IDs on this site. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may
       adversely affect certain features and functions.
       Click below to consent to the above or make granular choices. Your
       choices will be applied to this site only. You can change your
       settings at any time, including withdrawing your consent, by using
       the toggles on the Cookie Policy, or by clicking on the manage
       consent button at the bottom of the screen.
       Functional [ ] Functional Always active
       The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the
       legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service
       explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole
       purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an
       electronic communications network.
       Preferences [ ] Preferences
       The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate
       purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the
       subscriber or user.
       Statistics [ ] Statistics
       The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for
       statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used
       exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena,
       voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider,
       or additional records from a third party, information stored or
       retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify
       you.
       Marketing [ ] Marketing
       The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles
       to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across
       several websites for similar marketing purposes.
       Statistics
       Marketing
       Features
       Always active
       Always active
       Manage options Manage services Manage vendors Read more about these
       purposes
       (BUTTON) Accept (BUTTON) Deny (BUTTON) Manage options (BUTTON) Save
       preferences Manage options
       {title} {title} {title}
       Manage your privacy
       We use cookies to optimize our website and our service.
       Functional [ ] Functional Always active
       The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the
       legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service
       explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole
       purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an
       electronic communications network.
       Preferences [ ] Preferences
       The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate
       purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the
       subscriber or user.
       Statistics [ ] Statistics
       The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for
       statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used
       exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena,
       voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider,
       or additional records from a third party, information stored or
       retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify
       you.
       Marketing [ ] Marketing
       The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles
       to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across
       several websites for similar marketing purposes.
       Manage options Manage services Manage vendors Read more about these
       purposes
       (BUTTON) Accept (BUTTON) Deny (BUTTON) Manage options (BUTTON) Save
       preferences Manage options
       {title} {title} {title}
       (BUTTON) Manage consent (BUTTON) Manage consent

Explore

Search
       ____________________ (BUTTON)

Calendar
          + Today
          + Tomorrow

Tags
          + Food & Drink
          + Animals
          + Hobbies & Activities
          + Life & Living
          + Nature & Environment
          + Items & Things
       Close
