   #Berlin Experiences » Feed Berlin Experiences » Comments Feed Berlin
   Experiences » Was The Doener Kebab Invented In Berlin? – Mythbusting
   Berlin Comments Feed alternate alternate alternate

   Berlin Experiences Logo Berlin Experiences Logo

     * Tours
          + The Best Of Berlin Tour – The All-In-One Berlin Highlights
            Tour
          + The Capital Of Tyranny Tour – The Rise & Fall Of The Third
            Reich
          + The Republic Of Fear Tour – Life Behind The Iron Curtain
          + The Battle Of Berlin Tour – The Final Days Of Hitler’s City
          + The Glory Of Prussia Tour – The Iron Kingdom & The Golden Cage
          + The Invention Of Hell Tour – The Sachsenhausen Memorial &
            Museum
     * Articles
     * Book Now

   Menu

     * Tours
          + The Best Of Berlin Tour – The All-In-One Berlin Highlights
            Tour
          + The Capital Of Tyranny Tour – The Rise & Fall Of The Third
            Reich
          + The Republic Of Fear Tour – Life Behind The Iron Curtain
          + The Battle Of Berlin Tour – The Final Days Of Hitler’s City
          + The Glory Of Prussia Tour – The Iron Kingdom & The Golden Cage
          + The Invention Of Hell Tour – The Sachsenhausen Memorial &
            Museum
     * Articles
     * Book Now

   Döner Kebab in Berlin Döner Kebab in Berlin

Was The Doener Kebab Invented In Berlin? – Mythbusting Berlin

     * Matt Robinson
     * February 24, 2020
     * 10:51 pm

   Unlikely icon of immigrant success; fast food symbol of the working
   class; over-hyped midnight disco eat; or culturally appropriated
   cuisine? There is certainly more to a Döner Kebab than its constituent
   parts. But was it invented in Berlin?

   Each year more than 17 million of these moveable feasts are sold
   throughout Germany – in Berlin alone there are over 1,000 eateries
   dishing out Döners to the city’s 3.7 million residents, and the
   millions more visiting tourists.

   Officially, the Döner Kebab even outsells what is often considered the
   city’s most famous snack, the Currywurst. Making this hefty shaved
   elephant leg sandwich Berlin’s fast food snack of choice and an
   undeniable staple of the German diet.

     In-fact, the record for the largest Döner Kebab in the world was set
     in Berlin, back in 2017 – weighing in at a heartbreaking 423kg.

   Despite – or perhaps because of – its obvious popularity, the origin of
   the humble Döner has been much disputed.

   Was it really born out of the demand in 1970s West Berlin for a cheap
   portable eat, as is often speculated; or does its date back even
   further into the distant past of Ottoman Turkey?

   –

The Gastarbeiter legend & the Doner Kebab

   Kadir Nurman - Döner Kebab King Kadir Nurman - Döner Kebab King Kadir
   Nurman - The King of Kebab?

   When Turkish-German immigrant Kadir Nurman died in 2013, news outlets
   worldwide published obituaries for the man it would appear had single
   handedly transformed street food culture in Germany.

   But to ask most Berliners – the name would seem entirely unfamiliar.
   Not so, say, for Herta Heuwer – the woman credited as having invented
   the Currywurst in Berlin back in 1949. Many older Berliners at least –
   both West and East – would be well acquainted with her name.

   So what of the King of Kebab?

   It turns out Herr Nurmann is not the only person to have claimed to
   have invented the Döner Kebab. Not even the only Turkish-German
   immigrant to have done so. Nor the only one in Berlin, for that matter.

   In the 1960s, thousands of Turkish guest workers (Gastarbeiter) made
   their way to West Germany to work, following the waves of Italian,
   Spanish, and Greek workers who had preceded them. The economic boom
   period of the 1950s, the so-called Wirtschaftswunder, had led to labour
   shortages – made more acute by the dramatic reduction of East German
   workers in 1961 (following the construction of the Berlin Wall).

   Germany Turkish Tea Drinker Germany Turkish Tea Drinker There are an
   estimated 4m Turkish citizens living in Germany

   Despite this shortage, the West German government, in particular
   Minister of Labour and Social Affairs Theodor Blank, was initially
   highly reluctant to take workers from Turkey; objecting that the
   culture gap was too large. It would take intervention from the United
   States, eager to further align Turkey with the West during the Cold War
   era, to convince the West German government to sign a bilateral
   agreement on October 30th 1961.

   Soon Turkish citizens would become the largest group of guest workers
   in West Germany. Although as the country’s economic fortunes changed in
   the early 1960s, a large number of these were left seeking alternative
   forms of employment, leading many into that age-old immigrant honey pot
   – hospitality.

   In the process, gifting the country one of its most recognisable icons
   of cultural integration – the Döner.

   Three of these Turkish workers would have their names intrinsically
   linked with the introduction of the Döner Kebab. The first being Kadir
   Nurman – recognised in 2011 by the Association of Turkish Döner
   Manufacturers with a lifetime achievement award and the man most often
   credited with inventing the Döner Kebab in Berlin.

   Nurman arrived in Germany in 1960, first in Stuttgart, before moving to
   West Berlin aged 32 in 1966. Six years later he established a small
   eatery (Imbiss) at the Zoologischer Garten train station – correctly
   anticipating that the working class people in the area would be
   interested in buying a kebab-to-go. At the time the widespread
   perception of Kebab was that of grilled skewered meat, served on a
   plate with rice. What Nurman claims to have offered that was different,
   was serving it in a form that customers could carry away with them.

   Bahnhof Zoo Berlin Bahnhof Zoo Berlin Bahnhof Zoologischer Garten, the
   location of Kadir Nurman's original Döner Kebab stand, as it looks now

   Nurman’s Imbiss is no longer there, nor did he patent his creation – a
   process that would be rather problematic in Germany anyway (where
   patenting food and recipes is not as easy as simply trademarking a
   name). But the legend of his resourcefulness and imagination lives on;
   with it the questions of the accuracy of the claim.

   Two other Turkish immigrants have similarly thrown their hats in the
   ring regarding this creation story. One, Mehmet Aygün, now owns eight
   restaurants (Hasir) across the city – as well as the well-known Titanic
   hotel chain in Turkey and Germany. Rumour has it Aygün started working
   at his parents Turkish restaurant at the age of 16, where he claims to
   have introduced the Döner Kebab in its current popular form in March
   1971. Although elsewhere in press accounts, Aygün is reported to have
   started working in the restaurant only later in 1974 to support his
   studies – meaning that his claim as purveyor of the first Döner is
   brought greatly into question.

   Nezat Salim Nezat Salim Did Nevzat Salim invent the Döner Kebab in
   Reutlingen in 1969?

   The third possible pretender to the throne – Nevzat Salim (also a
   Turkish Gastarbeiter) – opened a snack stand in the south-west German
   city of Reutlingen – near Stuttgart – back in 1969. Where he claims he
   introduced the Döner Kebab, while working alongside his son. If true,
   that would predate Nurman at Zoo Station by three years. Could it be
   more than coincidence that both Nurmann and Salim settled in the south
   west german state of Baden Wurttemberg when they first arrived in the
   country (with Nurman choosing to move to Berlin)?

   As with any culinary creation, sourcing its actual origin is always
   problematic – like most things, food and recipes evolve. Rather than
   appear in a poof of meat flavoured smoke. Pinpointing the origin of any
   recipe is extremely problematic considering the distribution of similar
   dishes throughout the world, the evolution of techniques over time, and
   the melting pot movement of migrants that have cross-pollinated
   cuisine.

   –

What's a name got to do with it?

   Berlin Hasir Döner Kebab Berlin Hasir Döner Kebab The original Hasir
   Restaurant in Kreuzberg, Berlin

   It should be painfully obvious to anyone who has eaten their way
   through the culinary landscape that the concept of the Kebab itself did
   not originate in Berlin.

   From the Greek form of Gyros, to the Middle Eastern Shawarma, and tacos
   al pastor in Mexico, there are, of course, many different variations on
   the theme that could also be classified as falling into the rough
   category of ‘Kebab’. All cooked on a vertical rotisserie and served in
   sandwich form. All with their own equally problematic questions of
   inception.

     Although the provenance of the Berlin Döner Kebab may be in
     question; its acceptable form is not. And perhaps this is where we
     are getting somewhere – the difference is preparation and
     presentation.

   This culinary concoction importantly balances four essential
   ingredients – meat, sauce, vegetables, and perhaps most
   significantly…oil. The Berlin Döner Kebab should consist of thinly
   sliced meat (veal or beef) cut from a vertical rotating grill, served
   in a lightly toasted triangular-shaped bread alongside diced lettuce;
   cabbage; onion; chopped tomato; and cucumber – with a selection of
   sauces (garlic, chilli, and herb). Variations exist throughout the
   city, where the dish is served in a pita bread (like a greek gyros), or
   wrapped in a lavash or yufka flatbread (called a Dürüm Döner in this
   form).

   Rather than struggle with the Döner Kebab as a magical gift at the
   masterful hands of a god-like inventor perhaps it better to consider
   how it may have evolved into its final form.

   A little culinary detective work, please…

   Döner Kebab Stand In Thailand Döner Kebab Stand In Thailand A snack
   stop in Thailand selling 'Berlin Döner Kebab'

   Arguably the first and most ancient form of this preparation would be
   that of the şiş (Shish). Said to originate in Turkey (or possibly
   Persia?), where soldiers would use their swords to skewer and roast
   meat over an open fire. It doesn’t take much speculation to assume
   this, however, was not the first time someone impaled something and
   cooked it over a fire – hundreds of thousands of years of human history
   stands in the way of that claim. But it is a good starting point here.

   Next comes the Cağ kebabı, a stick of spiced lamb, including tail fat,
   traced back to the 18th century in the Eastern Turkish province of
   Erzurum – the distant ancestor of the Döner Kebab, as we now know it –
   cooked horizontally on an open fire.

   Later in the 19th century, in either Kastamonu or Bursa, this would be
   transformed into the rotating vertical meatsicle. Documented in the
   earliest known photo a vertical kebab taken in 1855 by the British
   photographer James Robertson – famous for documenting the Fall of
   Sevastopol in the Crimean war, the same year.

   First Photo Ever Döner Kebab First Photo Ever Döner Kebab The oldest
   known photograph of a vertical Kebab - taken in 1855 by James Robertson

   It wasn’t until the 1940s that the rotating vertical Kebab finally made
   its way to Istanbul, with Beyti Güler (owner of the Beyti restaurant)
   credited as making the Kebab a mainstream success there – serving heads
   of state, high-ranking politicians, and celebrities from around the
   world. Beyti even boasts of having catered for U.S. President Richard
   Nixon aboard Air Force One during his first official trip to Europe.
   Although, Beyti Güler is renowned for introducing a different kind of
   Kebab than the Döner, that now bears his name – the Beyti Kebab. Like
   most kebabs in Turkey, served in a Dürüm wrap, but made of lamb fillet
   wrapped in cutlet fat and served on a plate, chopped, and covered in
   sauce.

   It is important to consider that until the 1970s, the Kebab – in any
   real form it is now recognised – was far from embraced in western
   Europe. It could easily be argued that it took the influx of Turkish
   guest workers to Germany to alter the perception of what was commonly
   viewed as an alien dish.

     The greatest achievement of men like Kadir Nurman, Nevzat Salim, and
     certainly in the present day Mahmut Aygun (who still owns a kebab
     shop empire), may more specifically be described as having
     popularised, rather than invented, something that was already around
     – in various different forms.

   Perhaps the easier question to ask is not whether the Döner Kebab was
   invented in Berlin – but whether it was popularised here?

   Mustafa's Gemüse Kebap Mustafa's Gemüse Kebap One of Berlin's most
   famous Kebabs; Mustafa's Gemüse Kebap, Mehringdamm

   There is no doubt that Turkey has a strong claim on the Kebab as a
   general preparation. But the Döner Kebab as a phenomenon may very well
   belong to Berlin.

   Despite the official recognition of Kadir Nurman as the originator of
   the Döner Kebab, it certainly is possible that when in 1969, in the
   small town of Reutlingen, fellow Turkish guest worker Nevzat Salim
   started slinging kebabs that he got there first. But the audience and
   the reach would certainly have been much smaller.

   That Kadir Nurman opened his snack stall at West Berlin’s busiest
   station, he would undoubtedly have  drawn more attention – and although
   not having invented the Kebab, per se, managed to popularise the Döner
   Kebab (in its sandwich form).

   Acknowledging this, Kadir is quoted as saying: “Maybe someone else also
   did it, in some hidden corner, but no one noticed. The kebab became
   well-known through me.”

   Kadir’s case for inventor of the modern Berlin Döner becomes even more
   tenuous when we consider that back in 1972 he admits his version
   consisted of bread, meat, and a little greenery. And not the commonly
   accepted form of the Berlin Döner seen today – suggesting it evolved
   even further from whatever appeared at that time.

   One final point is worth considering: the claim that either Kadir, or
   Nevzat Salim, or perhaps even Mehmet Aygün, may have been the first to
   put the traditional Turkish Kebab in bread – and serve it to customers.

   Has it ever been claimed that the Earl of Sandwich, who since the 18th
   century has leant his name to anything stuck between bread, could have
   been responsible for inventing that?

   **

Verdict

   NO

   The Döner Kebab was not invented in Berlin.

   Popularised here? Ok.
   But there are no participation trophies for that.

   ***

Our Related Tours

   Republic Of Fear Tour Thumb Republic Of Fear Tour Thumb

   To learn more about the history of East German and life behind the Iron
   Curtain, have a look at our Republic Of Fear tours.
   Republic of Fear Quiz Thumbnail Republic of Fear Quiz Thumbnail

   Think you already know enough about life in the ‘Workers and Peasants
   State’? Take our Republic Of Quiz and find out.

Mythbusting Berlin

   Döner Kebab in Berlin Döner Kebab in Berlin

Was The Doener Kebab Invented In Berlin? – Mythbusting Berlin

   Currywurst in Berlin Currywurst in Berlin

Was Currywurst Invented In Berlin? – Mythbusting Berlin

   Adolf Hitler Eastern Front Adolf Hitler Eastern Front

Did Hitler Escape To Argentina In 1945? – Mythbusting Berlin

   Nazi bicycle infantry Nazi bicycle infantry

Did The Nazis Invent The Bicycle Reflector? – Mythbusting Berlin

   Inside the German parliament after the Reichstag fire Inside the German
   parliament after the Reichstag fire

Who Was Really Responsible For The Reichstag Fire? – Mythbusting Berlin

   Construction of the Berlin Wall at the Brandenburg Gate Construction of
   the Berlin Wall at the Brandenburg Gate

Who Built The Berlin Wall? – Mythbusting Berlin

   The Fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 The Fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989

Was The Fall Of The Berlin Wall An Accident? – Mythbusting Berlin

   Did Frederick the Great introduce the potato to Germany? Did Frederick
   the Great introduce the potato to Germany?

Did Frederick The Great Introduce The Potato To Germany? – Mythbusting Berlin

   Adolf Hitler practices his speech techniques Adolf Hitler practices his
   speech techniques

Was Adolf Hitler A Drug Addict? – Mythbusting Berlin

   Adolf Hitler's Alligator - Saturn Adolf Hitler's Alligator - Saturn

What Happened To Adolf Hitler’s Alligator? – Mythbusting Berlin

Berlin Experiences

     * The Capital of Tyranny - The Rise & Fall Of The Third Reich
     * The Republic of Fear - Life Behind The Iron Curtain
     * The Battle Of Berlin - The Final Days Of Hitler's City
     * The Glory of Prussia - The Iron Kingdom & The Golden Cage
     * The Invention Of Hell - The Sachsenhausen Concentration Camp

Featured Experiences

     * Walk Through The Brandenburg Gate
     * Visit The Berlin Wall
     * Visit The Reichstag Cupola At Night
     * Step Inside The Olympic Stadium
     * Visit The Grave Of Frederick The Great
     * Cross The Border At Checkpoint Charlie

Mythbusting Berlin

     * Did Hitler Escape To Argentina In 1945?
     * Who Was Really Responsible For The Reichstag Fire?
     * Was The Fall Of The Berlin Wall An Accident?
     * Who Built The Berlin Wall?
     * Did The Nazis Invent The Bicycle Reflector?

Our Top Articles

     * The Battle Of Berlin 1945 - A Day By Day Account
     * The Potsdam Conference 1945 - A Day By Day Account
     * Explore Berlin In 365 Objects
     * 55 Things You Should Know Before Visiting Berlin
     * Eight Strangest Berlin Wall Escapes

   Twitter Facebook-f Instagram Youtube Pinterest Vimeo-v Linkedin-in

   © 2018 Berlin Experiences/Holme-Robinson GbR

     * Our Partners | Berlin Experiences
     * Imprint
     * Terms And Conditions
     * Privacy Policy

   Menu

     * Our Partners | Berlin Experiences
     * Imprint
     * Terms And Conditions
     * Privacy Policy
