   Sahan Kebab Logo
     *
     *
     *
     *

     * ABOUT US
     *
     * BRANCHES
     *
     * MENU
     *
     * RECIPES
     *
     * ACTIVITIES
     *
     * MEDIA
     *
     * CONTACT

     * HISTORY
     *
     * TAHİR TEKİN ÖZTAN
     *
     * QUALITY MANAGEMENT
     *
     * PERSONNEL SERVICE
     *
     * HUMAN RESOURCES

     * SAHAN ATASEHIR
     *
     * SAHAN CADDEBOSTAN
     *
     * SAHAN KURTKOY
     *
     * SAHAN KALAMIS

     * ORGANIZATION
     *
     * BREAKFAST
     *
     * COOK BOOK
     *
     * CHILDREN'S KITCHEN
     *
     * PLAYGROUND

     * VISUAL MEDIA
     *
     * PRINTED MEDIA

WHAT IS KEBAB?

HISTORY OF KEBAB

   When doing researches about kebab, it's required to start from
   ''kebab'' word first of all. Root, meaning and definitions within the
   word kebab will guide us.

   Looking at the definitions of the word ''kebab'' and meanings it takes
   in historical periods, it can be said that kebab exists since the
   moment fire was found.

   Kebap means meat cooked drily directly on fire or within a pot
   according to the Turkish Language Association. (However, what we
   understand from today's definition kebab is that it includes tomato and
   pepper). According to the comments of the experts, people's waiting for
   the meat to be cooked around the fire when fire was found and used to
   cook meat, i.e. when the kebab was being cooked for the first time
   formed a basis for table culture.

   In Sumerian language, the word kebab is derived from ''kabuba'' word
   meaning roasting. According to the some of the sources, kebab is a
   general definition for the Arabic-origin meat dishes. From these
   explanations, it's told that kebab comes to Anatolia from peasants who
   immigrated to Adana from Arabic countries to cultivate.

   In addition to all these, some of the history books includes the
   information that Darius, king of Persia, used to make show of strength
   to his soldiers by spitting the roasted meat to a skewer before going
   to war. In that period, kebab, in other words roasted meat, was meant
   to be indicator for force and wealth. And kebab is used as pieces of
   meat spitted to the skewer. Through the human history, eating and
   drinking culture was developed by multi-staged transitions and kebab
   was also developed in that parallel.

   In first nomadic societies, it's seen that people were collecting
   things and particularly the women tried to survive with the herbs they
   collected from the nature until they learned how to hunt. Men started
   hunting when their physical strength increased and they started to eat
   the meats they hunted without cooking and after the fire was found they
   begin to cook the meat with trial-and-error method. Accordingly, it can
   be said that usage of the spices was started before kebab.

   When human began to sacrifice animals for god according to the beliefs
   of communities, techniques to eat and cook meats were started to
   increase. Technique for meat tenderizing and cutting into small pieces,
   as we call mince today, was also developed in that period. History of
   mince kebab is also dates back to ancient times...

   It won't be wrong to say that kebab cooking technique was started in
   that period. Kebab within today's eating and drinking culture was
   started after the fire was found in the history of humanity and
   developed as usage of spices and meat cooking techniques increased.
   Mince type kebabs and vegetable kebabs were emerged in those periods
   and developed to take its form today. Existence of spices within the
   kebab dates back to older times as mentioned above.

   When kebab is handled according to the historical periods, we see that
   it took its shape according to the conditions in that period.

KEBAB IN TURKISH CUISINE

   Although kebab has an important place in Turkish cuisine, it has earned
   the position it deserves yet in recent years. Self-development of kebab
   restaurants and transformation into elegant restaurants in recent years
   and changes in presentation of kebabs had undoubtedly an impact on
   this. Kebab attracts the attention of important chiefs of world
   cuisines with its presentation besides its historical past and taste.

   While arguments about red meat are still ongoing in recent times,
   experts tell that red meat is a very important food product if it's
   eaten continently, a very important food product thanks to its
   strengthening nature and serious problem can occur in case of its
   deficiency. Kebab becomes more healthily with accompanying vegetables
   and lettuces considering its presentation. Especially, onion and garlic
   accompanying the kebabs are used as natural antibiotics throughout four
   seasons recently. When we individually examine pomegranate syrup,
   fruits, vegetables used in other kebab types, kebab combination seems
   to be healthy.

KEBAB IN ANATOLIA

   Rather, herbs collected in the regions are flavored with kebab. Such
   that, considering Southeastern Anatolia region, kebab is flavored with
   different spices even in physically very closed cities. For example;
   kebab names like Adana Kebab, Urfa Kebab, Antep kebab... And bitterness
   has also become determinant for kebab names in time. Hot kebab, normal
   kebab...etc.

   Over time, legumes stepped in, one of them is Simit kebab (Oruk kebab)
   in which fine bulgur is added.

KEBAB IN OTTOMAN

   One of the most important issue topics when talking about Ottoman
   Cuisine is whether court kitchen included kebab in Ottoman period or
   not. While ''Kebab'', as it bears in mind today, is served with meat
   and tomato, pepper, onion, parsley and sometimes with radish, kebab
   definition is much more different in Court Cuisine. There are justified
   reasons for being different as tomato, pepper was included in court
   cuisine years later. When looking at the sources, it's seen that they
   were included in the kitchens after Fatih period.

   Again according to the printed sources, it's told that one of the
   kebabs included in Court Cuisine was Süd Kebab for which meat was
   cooked slowly through a skewer and in the meantime meat fat was pouring
   into the pot full of rice and thus rice was cooked as well.

   Considering the ''kebab'' definition mentioned in the beginning of the
   text, it's enough to call it Kebab as the food was roasted and cooked
   meat. It's not required for all kebab plates to include tomato,
   pepper...etc.

   In addition, one of the most interesting points regarding kebab in
   sources belonging to Ottoman Court Cuisine is that sometimes meat were
   spitted onto stem of the eggplant instead of skewer to cook kebab.
   Another example is kebab cooked by putting meat pieces onto stem of the
   bay leaves.

   When today's cuisine cultures are analyzed, Kebab regionally belongs to
   a very wide geography and shows local and regional differences.
   Differences in cooking kebab have created kebab varieties. There are
   tens of kebab types due to the usage of vegetables, spices, lettuces
   and fruits. Some of them are; altı ezmeli kıyma kebabı, altı ezmeli
   kuşbaşı kebabı, çoban kebabı, domatesli kebap, patlıcan kebabı, soğan
   kebabı, sarımsak kebabı, ,keme kebabı, yeni dünya kebabı, elma kebabı,
   ekşili elma kebabı, ayva kebabı, mantar kebabı, kıyma kebabı, yoğurtlu
   kebap, kuşbaşı kebabı, terbiyeli kebap, simit kebabı, vişne kebabı.

KEBAB IN OUR DAY

   When you speak of kebab in our day, kebab restaurants in cities and
   certain kebab names come to minds. However, when it's analyzed deeply,
   kebab is a cuisine culture containing certain values within itself.
   Even, kebab is a type of cooking form beyond the meat. Roasted
   chestnuts, cheese kebabs can be shown as example.

   When kebab is examined based on the regions and cities, it's understood
   that kebab form made with materials used contains the regional culture
   within it. In Syria, especially in Aleppo, fruit usage in kebab forms
   is very common however it's seen that fruit usage in kebabs is very
   rare in cuisine cultures of Anatolia except for Gaziantep. It can be
   said that some of the similarities between Gaziantep and Aleppo
   cuisines is because of the proximity. It's seen that spices are more
   common in Adana and Urfa cuisines and in some regions, kebab differs
   from others by meat selection.

KEBAB IN GAZIANTEP CUISINE

   One of the first cities that comes to mind when talking about kebab
   today is of course Gaziantep. As Gaziantep cuisine is the only cuisine
   remembered not only with kebab bu also with city name, it has a very
   wide food and beverage culture. In Gaziantep cuisine, kebab has a very
   important place; significant attention is shown to lettuce, piyaz and
   drinks to be serviced with kebab and spices used for kebab and cooking
   method as well. A conservative approach is applied for the kebabs in
   Gaziantep cuisine, it's certain which spice will be used for mince
   kebab, how long simit kebab will be cooked and which dressing of food
   will be used for kebab. Sustainability of conventionalism in these
   details shows the sensitivity in kebab making in Gaziantep cuisine.

   In addition to all these, there are kebab types specially cooked by
   women in kitchens which are named accordingly in Gaziantep cuisine.
   Kazan kebabı, ekmek kebabı, gavur kebabı, ciğer kebabı, kamış kebabı,
   damat kebabı, parmak kebabı, Kilis kebabı, Halep kebabı, sebzeli kebap,
   fıstıklı kebap, hint kebabı, tas kebabı.

   Role of the butchers in kebab making is very important in Gaziantep,
   for example; women buy appropriate meat when they say which kebab they
   will cook to the butchers, and even sometimes, kebab meat is bought
   from butcher. Women prepares kebab in tray at home and sends them to
   the bakery of the neighborhood to cook them.

CERTAIN KEY POINTS FOR KEBAB MAKING AND PREPARATION

PREPARATION OF KEBAB

     * Type of the meat used in kebab, resting of meat, type of dressing
       and correct meat selection according to the type of kebab are very
       important.
     * Meat and fat ratio should be well arranged according to the type of
       mince kebabs.
     * Kuşbaşı kebap is dried if it's waited on the skewer. Meat should be
       basted with water to be put on the meat.
     * Kebab will be delicious if it's not dried.
     * Black pepper should be added onto simit or vegetable kebabs.
     * For dressing of kebabs, powdered red power should be added instead
       of chili pepper.
     * There are many dressing types for kebabs. These materials are olive
       oil, milk, yogurt, onion, garlic, mixture spices and even vinegar.
     * Particularly, these materials used for kuşbaşı kebab change the
       taste of most kebabs.
     * Materials used for kebab like powdered red pepper, tomato sauces,
       cumin, garlic, onion, dry mint and olive oils should be used as
       required.
     * If the meat cubes (kuşbaşı) are hard to use in kebab, it should be
       marinated with yogurt a night before. The next day, desired
       dressing is made and kebab is cooked.
     * Mince meat for kebab should be grinded in chopper or first, in
       large threaded machine and then again in chopper.
     * When making kebab, if the meat is in the refrigerator, it's taken
       out and kept at ambient temperature.

KEBAB COOKING

     * Coal type to be used should be long lasting and fire flames should
       be adjusted.
     * Cubes of liver, chicken and mince kebabs should be cooked at fire
       with lower flames.
     * Onion, garlic and eggplant kebabs should be cooked with more
       powerful fires lacking flames. (Thus, vegetables are softened and
       cooked in kebabs)
     * Kebab is not cooked under lower oven heat. As it's required
       powerful heat, the food dries without cooking.
     * Before putting the kebab into the oven, warm water should be
       sprinkled to the face according to the type. Especially, more water
       should be sprinkled in onion and garlic kebabs.
     * Tomato and peppers should be positioned in the center when aligning
       the eggplant kebab on the tray. As skins of the eggplant burns
       rapidly, after aligning on the tray, if you apply slight amount of
       olive oil (1 table spoon) on the surface of the eggplants, risk of
       burning for the skins is reasonably decreased.
     * Simit kebab is spitted into the same skewer as to be cooked at
       barbecue and aligned on the tray by removing from the skewer
       without ruining its form.
     * Onion and garlic kebabs are lined and aligned as one meat and one
       vegetable.
     * For mince kebabs cooked at barbecue, fat of the meat melts down and
       partially spills onto barbecue. In oven, on the other hand, entire
       fat is remains on the tray and kebab gets heavier. Therefore, fat
       ratio in oven kebabs should be reasonably decreased.

PRESENTATION OF KEBAB

   Particularly for Gaziantep Cuisine, usage of pomegranate syrup in some
   kebabs and serving turnip besides some kebabs...etc. It's definitely
   important which kebab will be eaten with which bread. For kebabs to be
   wrapped, sometimes thin bread is served and sometimes flat bread is
   served. Generally, kebabs are served with buttermilk drink.

   Historical journey of red meat, i.e. kebab, was started with fire and
   has continued until today and we wish the sustainability of
   conventionalism in kebab cooking and taste and innovations are only
   made in presentation.

   Besides being the most important representative of Gaziantep Cuisine,
   Sahan also has an important position with its kebabs. Sahan is
   conscious of responsibility for traditional foods and regional
   materials used in kebabs to catch the original tastes are provided from
   Gaziantep.

   There are many kebab types in menu of Sahan but seasonal kebabs are
   also highly assertive as well. For example;

YENİ DÜNYA KEBABI (NEW WORLD KEBAB)

   ''New World Kebab'' which became a Sahan classic with cooking method
   and presentation form is produced from March to June. New World Kebab
   is combined with eggplant kebab and garlic kebab and served as Sahan
   Trio. Sahan Trio is a festival coming with spring.

SARIMSAK KEBABI (GARLIC KEBAB)

   A kebab made with fresh garlic. It comes out at the same time with New
   World kebab and is produced similarly.

SOĞAN KEBABI (ONION KEBAB)

   A very special kebab made in winter months. It's prepared with little
   onions coming out in November. Onion and mince are cooked at same
   skewer and left to transpiration with pomegranate syrup. It's eaten by
   wrapping into lavash bread. It's a taste definitely needs to be tried
   and beyond the expectations.

KEME KEBABI (KEME KEBAB)

   Keme kebab is produced between March and June. Keme is a vegetable
   which is brittle when uncooked coming from southeastern region. When he
   spitted onto skewer to cook, it cracks. Therefore, custom-made keme
   bore bits are used and then they are spitted onto the skewer. Kebab is
   prepared with special mince grinded with knife and wrapped and eaten
   with onion piyaz.

ORUK KEBABI (ORUK KEBAB)

   A kebab made with simit (fine bulgur), garlic, mint and spices.

Kebabs

     * Kebabs - 12
     * Kebabs - 12
     * Kebabs - 12
     * Kebabs - 12
     * Kebabs - 12
     * Kebabs - 12
     * Kebabs - 12
     * Kebabs - 12
     * Kebabs - 12
     * Kebabs - 12
     * Kebabs - 12
     * Kebabs - 12
     * Kebabs - 12
     * Kebabs - 12

Meze

     * Meze - 13
     * Meze - 13
     * Meze - 13
     * Meze - 13
     * Meze - 13
     * Meze - 13
     * Meze - 13
     * Meze - 13
     * Meze - 13
     * Meze - 13

Desserts

     * Desserts - 15
     * Desserts - 15
     * Desserts - 15
     * Desserts - 15
     * Desserts - 15
     * Desserts - 15
     * Desserts - 15
     * Desserts - 15
     * Desserts - 15
     * Desserts - 15
     * Desserts - 15
     * Desserts - 15
     * Desserts - 15
     * Desserts - 15
     * Desserts - 15
     * Desserts - 15
     * Desserts - 15

   [sahan-logo.png]
     *
     *
     *
     *

NAVIGATION

     * HOME
     * MENU
     * COOK BOOK
     * ABOUT US
     * ORGANIZATION
     * CHILDREN IN SAHAN
     * SAHAN BRUNCH
     * CONTACT
     * HUMAN RESOURCES
     *

News And Announcement List

   If you want to subscribe to Newsletter, please enter your e-mail
   address in the following box and press submit.
   ____________________
   Invalid E-Mail!
   SUBMIT

   Tilbe Gida Turizm San. Tic. A.S. © 2014
   Web Tasarım ve İçerik Yönetimi

   Scroll

     * TR
     * DE
