   #alternate alternate alternate

     * DE
     * EN
     * TR

     * Articles
     * Team
     * Donate
     * Topic Overview
     * Concept

     * Topic Overview
     * Concept
     * Team
     * Press
     * Magazine Shop
     * Advertising on renk.?

   The Kebab Project
   Food & Drink

The Kebab Project

   On the Origins and Significance of a Dish
   Shop Anzeige
   Advert
   A post by
   Gast ArbeiterIn
   1–12–2019
     * DE
     * EN
     * TR

   Was the döner kebab really invented in Berlin? Çağan Okuyan’s artbook,
   “Kebab Project” goes some way towards answering this question. In the
   end, however, the subject becomes too unwieldy, and the origin of the
   döner kebab remains as elusive as ever.

   Çağan’s book – the first of it’s kind – documents the aesthetics of the
   kebab shop firstly in Paris – where Çağan moved to when he was 12, from
   Adapazarı near Istanbul, and where he studied graphic design and visual
   arts. He then picks up the thread in Berlin, where he currently lives,
   andconcludes in south-eastern Turkey – thought to be the culinary
   cradle of the kebab.
   The Kebab Project

   The photobook.

   The book is part sociological investigation, part autobiography and
   part self-therapy. It document two years of research in Europe and
   Turkey, supplementing photos with texts in Turkish and broken English,
   recounting quips, items of kebab- lore and anecdotes of kebab shop
   workers steeped in sadness, melancholy and homesickness. It is an
   impressive work, a labor of love, that has so far been far from
   remunerative for Çağan. The pictures and stories are so vivid that they
   are almost filmic.

   Ultimately, the motive for the project seems to have been for Çağan to
   recapture a bit of the “Middle Eastern” warmth of Turkey in the face of
   the heartless egoism and selfishness of day-to-day life in Paris, where
   Çağan made his money in the fashion and design industry. The kebab
   shops, which he chose to document, were, by contrast, oases of human
   warmth and sympathy.

     “When I started this project I felt that there was a very big
     Turkish, Anatolian boy living inside me, and he had to be fed,” says
     Çağan.

   It is a brisk October evening in a canal-side café in Berlin,
   Kreuzberg, a short walk from Kottbusser Tor, sometimes called “Little
   Istanbul” for its many Turkish shops and bistros. Çağan is wearing a
   black coat over an orange t-shirt that says “Helal”  in Arabic. His
   hair is long, his hands busily tattooed.

   The Kebab Project

   “It wasn’t easy at first,” said Çağan, about his initial attempts at
   engaging kebab shop workers in Paris. “I look like this, you know – I
   have many tattoos. I am coming with the camera. I am a little bit
   atypical for these guys. I went to the shop once, twice, five times.
   After ten times I could finally get my camera out and start taking
   photos.”

   No one could understand his obsession with kebab shops at the outset,
   says Çağan. “My friends said ‘What the f*** are you doing? What is
   kebab?” Even the kebab shop workers themselves couldn’t make him out
   and said Çağan was wasting his time. “Who the f*** will be interested
   in what I say?” Çağan recounts one worker telling him. “Man, go find
   yourself a real job, okay? There are boys your age who own a Porsche
   already. Do you understand me? I am being honest with you, man. This
   little project of yours sounds shit to me.”

   But Çağan remained undaunted. He came with camera and without, on
   rollerblades or with his fold-up bicycle. Often he would show up
   shortly before closing time. Over coffee, or just chilling with his
   phone, he asked questions, simple questions. And he found that the
   workers liked having someone to talk to.

   He asked them how they ended up selling kebab in Paris. “And there were
   crazy stories, of course. Left-over stories. Some came with another
   mindset. Of course it didn’t work as planned. One
   was a fugitive. One a political refugee. One a draft-dodger.” The
   wildest story was about the guy who wanted to leave Turkey, but had no
   visa or papers. In a car with two nephews, one brother and a Turkish
   carpet he left for France. Shortly before reaching the border his
   nephews rolled him up in the Turkish carpet and sat on top of him and
   they cruised into France. And that was how he got to Paris.

     “All of the kebab shops I documented,” says Çağan, “serve more than
     döner. They serve a story.”

   Childhood Days.

   Çağan’s “kebab story”, as he puts it began with his immigration to
   France with his dad and his brother in 2002. His mom joined them a
   couple of years later. While in high school Çağan discovered the kebab
   shops of Paris. “We were going to the Turkish restaurant to hear some
   Turkish. To exchange some ideas. And for me it was like – Wow – going
   to a Turkish restaurant and eating and having a conversation.”

   Çağan studied graphic design and visual arts in Paris. He did a stint
   in Istanbul at several big studios. He then started to combine graphic
   design and video with traditional art. Today he has severed his ties
   with commercial design, and is primarily working as a visual artist.
   Çağan became mainly interested in kebab shops as an antidote to the
   usual fast-food chain fare.
   Paris first got a taste of the kebab in the sixties with the influx of
   Turkish workers. They brought with kebab – initially on a plate with
   fries. It became the choice dish for North African immigrants in search
   of helal food, an alternative to the Algerian merguez. It wasn’t long
   before the kebab became the proletarian dish par excellence.

   “During the 90’s, kebab was the unofficial official food for students
   and working class,” says Çağan, giving fast food chains like McDonalds
   and KFC a run for their money. In the last several years, however,
   Çağan has seen how some so-called “kebab” chains have begun to muscle
   their way into the market in Paris, threatening the kebab shops that
   have been in business since the eighties and nineties.

   “So I started crowd-funding for this book. I said if you give me 25 I
   will give you the book. I said my aim was documenting the authentic
   places before they get lost. Arty-Farty, which is a European Union
   artist collective, called me after two weeks of this crowd- funding.
   They said, ‘We want to invite you and talk about kebab döner.’ They
   said kebab döner is the official plate of the European Union. How would
   you respond to this? I got an invitation to Lyo University faculty of
   sociology. Arte called me up. So did UNESCO and National Geographic.
   The Kebab Project

   Busy Hours.

   “I was like, ‘Oh! What is going on?’ Then I thought, from now on I have
   to be more open-minded about this topic. I have to ask more questions.
   And then I decided, okay, this book is going to be a research about
   taking kebab as a metaphor of integration, and just documenting these
   places, the makers and the eaters. Kebab Project began to evolve into a
   political project slowly.”

   Çağan stresses that he is not a food researcher. He is more of a
   dilettante with a visual arts background, interested in the aesthetics
   of the kebab shop. Çağan had an exhibition in Istanbul, last April, the
   first exhibition of the project which was also a kind of release party
   for the book. “I did a very kitschy installation with some cute colors,
   baby blues, baby pinks, with very sad quotes from the book. One said,
   ‘My dreams are cancelled’. In Turkish, like, ‘I don’t have any hope for
   the future.’ Or one said, ‘The winds of separation blew us away.’
   Because he is separated from his roots, see?”

   Sensing that he was onto something big –exploding the narrow Parisian
   confines of the story – Çağan moved to Berlin last year to research the
   kebab in the capital where allegedly the döner
   kebab was invented. Here the story became really interesting. Çağan ate
   a kebab every day. He found the kebab was different Berlin. The salads,
   the sauces, the quantity of meat. At Mustafa Gemüse Döner, perhaps
   Berlin’s most famous kebab shop, he saw how they even started putting
   feta cheese on their kebabs.

   And the names of the shops. That was interesting, too. The shops in
   Berlin have names of Turkish towns enticing homesick Turks. They all
   referred to places that had been left behind, that one felt a certain
   nostalgia or homesickness for.

     There was Antalia Döner Kebab or Bodrum Döner Kebab.“Names that
     reminded you of home, and that you were not home.”

   “In Turkey you would not find this, like Kebab Shop Bodrum or Kebab
   Antaliya,” says Çağan. “They would call it like private names. Ahmet
   Kebab Döner, Mehmet Kebab Döner. But here is always an appellation
   back.” And what about the claim that the döner kebab was invented in
   Berlin? Çağan spoke with kebab shop workers about the orgins of the
   famous dish, findings out that there were two men in history, the one
   Ahmed something, now dead, the other with the name of Mehmet Durmuş –
   today a very, very rich man. Together they ran the first kebab shop in
   Berlin, at Zoo Bahnhof. They said that Mehmet Durmuş put the kebab into
   a sandwich.
   The Kebab Project

   The Berlin doner Kebab, very hip.

   “They didn’t bring the sandwich here,” says Çağan. “They started
   selling like, pizza, not so fast that you can grab and walk. It didn’t
   work first. And then around ’69 and ’71 these two guys started the
   sandwich thing. And of course no one thought of licensing the kebab
   döner. That’s why they are still fighting. And then it exploded. In
   Berlin.” The döner kebab as we know it in Berlin is a kebab of a whole
   other dimension compared to it’s Turkish cousins. In Turkey the meat is
   paltry, the bread is different. There is no salad and no sauces.

     “I used to ask for mayonnaise in Istanbul,” says Çağan, and they
     were like, ‘What? Why is that? It’s not very matching’ But now the
     Berlin kebab is inspiring bigger places, like more touristy places.”

   Adana, in Turkey’s south-east, a sprawling rough-and-tumble city renown
   for its intense heat and spicy cuisine was the last stop on Çağan’s
   kebab quest. “During my interviews with all in Berlin, Brussles, Paris
   and London I realized most of those brothers – and sisters – are from
   Adana, Sanliurfa, Gaziantep and Mardin. So I decided to go there. To
   Adana.” Adana is the town of the Adana kebab, essentially minced meat
   stuck to a spit and cooked over hot coals. Could this be the ur-döner
   kebab?

   To be sure, Adana probably was the source of the kebab. But what about
   the döner? The slowly turning of the meat on the skewer. For that,
   determines Çağan, you probably have to go back to pre-history.
   “Honestly, it was too big a project for me,” says Çağan. “I learned
   while doing the project. I met so many people I read so many books. Did
   so much research. In the end I can say, it is a very heavy subject,
   kebab.

     “In conclusion I can say that kebab is just a bridge. Everyone eats
     kebab. Everyone. I thought I could narrow it down to a couple of
     types. But no. Who is eating kebab? After two or three weeks of
     research, I abandoned this – everyone is eating kebab! There is no
     one who doesn’t. Even the French right wing politician will eat it.
     Or the prostitute. Or Uber driver. Everyone.”

   Text: Robert Rigney

   All pictures were taken from The Kebab Project
   Text: Gast ArbeiterIn
   Tweet
   Keywords: art bookBerlinÇağan
   OkuyandönerfoodFotografieKebabOriginParisturkish

Anti-racism now and everywhere!

   Why and how we have to support black communities
   Society & Stories

Shame on you!

   When you speak your own truth and live by it.
   Society & Stories

Current articles

   Anti-racism now and everywhere!

   Shame on you!

   Why the ‘I’ of BIPoC should not be left out

   Between History and Overcoming the Present

   What’s Beef?!

Next article

   Die Band Baba Zula ©Emir Sivaci
   Music & Dance

Derin, Derin

   An Interview with Murat Ertel of BaBa ZuLa

   Lust auf Lecker Newsletter?
   ________________________________________
   Los geht's

     * Team
     * Articles
     * Concept
     * Legal Information
     * Advertising with renk
     * Donate

   This website uses cookies. More Info (BUTTON) Check
