   #alternate alternate alternate

   Book your bucket list adventure here with TRIPS by Culture Trip

   (BUTTON) Places To Stay (BUTTON) Experiences (BUTTON) Trips
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
     * Places To Stay
     * Experiences
     * Trips
     * (BUTTON) Travel Guides
     * (BUTTON) Videos
     * My Plans
     * My Bookings

   (BUTTON) Sign Up
   (BUTTON) Log In

Travel Guides

Videos

     * Beyond Hollywood
     * Hungerlust
     * Pioneers of love

   EUROPE
   /
   GERMANY
   /
   Food & Drink

A Brief History Of The Döner Kebab

   © Alex Kehr/WikiCommons
   © Alex Kehr/WikiCommons
   Photo of Lily Cichanowicz
   Lily Cichanowicz
   9 December 2017
   View
   (BUTTON)

   Döner kebabs are a type of Turkish dish similar to the Greek gyro or
   the Arab shawarma made with seasoned meat shaved from a vertical
   rotisserie, a style of cooking that dates back to the Ottomans. They
   are highly popular as a late-night snack or quick meal on the go
   throughout much of Europe, but how did they get here?

   In Germany alone, döner kebab sales reach a staggering more than 3.5
   billion euros each year, and 600 tons of döner meat are consumed each
   day, making it one of the most popular fast food items in the country.

   IFRAME: https://www.youtube.com/embed/elE4_nf4PpA?feature=oembed

   With many world-famous dishes of cultural significance in multiple
   countries, there’s a lot of lore surrounding the origin of the döner
   kebab, with multiple individuals and cultures disputing responsibility
   for its invention. With Turks comprising the largest ethnic group of
   non-German origin in the country, many believe that the döner kebab was
   actually first created in Berlin by a Turkish guest worker named Kadir
   Nurman in 1972. He sold his first döner kebab in West Berlin across
   from Bahnhof Zoo.

   At 26, Nurman emigrated from Turkey to Stuttgart in 1960 as part of a
   major initiative in West Germany at the time to increase its labor
   force. Six years later, Nurman came to Berlin to work in the printing
   business but quickly noticed that there weren’t many substantial
   options for busy German workers looking to eat lunch on the go.

   Deriving his idea for the döner kebab as we know it today from the
   typical meal of Turkish royalty consisting of meat skewers served on a
   plate with rice and vegetables, Nurman wanted to make this tasty dish
   more portable. Thus, he simply wrapped these ingredients in a kind of
   bread known as durum, and voila! The döner was born.

   Of course, this neatly packaged story is often disputed.

   Some say that the döner was incepted in Turkey, but the chairman of the
   Turkish Döner Production in Europe is vehement that the döner was,
   indeed, invented in Germany. Variations certainly do exist in Turkey,
   and many will attest to the fact that the döner has existed in
   different forms (and under various names) in the Middle East for ages.

   Others who claim to have first created the döner include Nevzat Salim,
   a Turkish man who alleges that he sold the first ones in 1969 in the
   town of Reutlingen out of a stand operated with his son. Mehmet Aygün,
   a fellow Berliner, also says he created the first döner in 1971.

   Either way, the presence of the döner kebab in Germany has served as an
   important vehicle for the country’s large Turkish population to
   successfully integrate into European life, and it’s certainly
   influential on the country’s food culture. In fact, all this talk of
   döner kebabs is enough to make a person hungry, and the famed Mustafa’s
   Gemüse Kebap is open till 2 am.
   Give us feedback

Cookies Policy

   We and our partners use cookies to better understand your needs,
   improve performance and provide you with personalised content and
   advertisements. To allow us to provide a better and more tailored
   experience please click "OK"
   (BUTTON) OK
